---
layout:     post
title:      ATS2866
subtitle:   
date:       2026-02-16
author:     Zachary Wang
header-img: img/Post_bg.jpg
catalog: true
tags:
    - Course
---

## Week 6

## week7 The Limits of Matrices

Decide which logic can be reach via matrices and which is not.

### matrix logic

Those logics can be decided by a matrix!

- CL, K3, LP, FDE
- universal logic

A matrix can determine a logic, but usually it is not the only matrix that determine this logic.

Another very important example is the empty logic, which is not a matrix logic. We can prove it by thinking of argument $p/p$. So there is a property of matrix logic: every  matrix logic must contain arguments like $p/p$.

### Reflexivity

By abstracting one of the feature of matrix, we consider **reflexive logic**: all arguments with form $A/A$ is valid in the logic. Hence every matrix logic is reflexive.

So we can consider the **weakest reflexive logic**(WRL), which only contains arguments like $A/A$.

### Monotonicity

Now thinking of such kind of question: Is every reflexive logic a matrix logic? The answer is no, because WRL is not a matrix logic, which means $A/A$ cannot cover all arguments in matrix logic.

**rule instance**: it consist of some **premise-arguments** and a **conclusion-argument**. It is usually written in this kind of form: 

$$\frac{p/q}{p \land q/r}$$
$$\frac{p/p \quad p/q}{p,q/p}$$
$$\frac{}{q \to r/s}$$

A logic **obeys** a rule instance if either:

- there exists premise-argument that invalid in the logic.
- the conclusion-argument is valid in the logic.

A **rule** consist of some rule instances, and a logic obeys a rule means it obeys every rule instances in the rule.

Now we can start with an important rule: **monotonicity**, which consist of rule instances of this kind of form:

$$\frac{\Gamma/A}{\Sigma/A}$$

where $\Gamma \subseteq \Sigma$.

Using this rule we can define **monotonic logic**.

It's easy to show that every matrix logic is monotonic. So here we are: every matrix logic is reflexive and monotonic.

### Transitivity

However, we can still construct some logics that are reflexive and monotonic, but not a matrix logic. For example, the L1 logic, it contains $\Gamma/A$ iff either:

- $A$ is a member of $\Gamma$
- $A$ is $q$ and $p \in \Gamma$
- $A$ is $r$ and $q \in \Gamma$

It's easy to check that L1 is reflexive and monotonic, but not a matrix logic.

**Transitivity** is a rule consist of rule instances in the form:

$$\frac{\Gamma/A \quad \Gamma,A/B}{\Gamma/B}$$

Also, it's easy to show that L1 is not transitive and every matrix logic is transitive.

### Substituion Invariance

Substitution invariance is also a rule, which consist of rule instances in the form:

$$\frac{\Gamma/A}{\Sigma/B}$$

with a substitution $s$ such that 

- $s : \Gamma \to \Sigma$.
- $s(A) = B$.

It's still easy to show that every matrix logic is substitution invariant.

